Bibliography
Crime During the Transition to Adulthood: How Youth Fare As They Leave Out-
of-Home Care in Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin, 2002-2007

This bibliography includes published and unpublished works that are related 
to ICPSR study 27062. It includes works that are based on primary
or secondary analysis of the data, or which describe or critique those
data or the collection methodology. 

If you publish a work or know of other works that are based on these data,
please send the complete citation and name of the ICPSR study used to:
icpsr-biblio-notify@umich.edu 


1. Cusick, Gretchen R.; Courtney, Mark E., "Offending During Late
Adolescence: How Do Youth Aging Out of Care Compare with Their Peers?."
Issue Brief. Issue Brief #111, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, Center
for Children, Chapin Hall, Jan 2007. 2005-IJ-CX-0031
Full text PDF: http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/files/publications/ChapinHallDocument_0.pdf

2. Cusick, Gretchen Ruth; Courtney, Mark E.; Havlicek, Judy; Hess, Nathan,
"Crime During the Transition to Adulthood: How Youth Fare as They Leave
Out-of-Home Care." Executive Summary. NCJ 229667, Washington, DC: United
States Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, Jan 2010.
2005-IJ-CX-0031; 2005-IJ-CX-4031
Abstract: http://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=251698
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/229667.pdf
The study found that offending patterns among youth aging out of foster
care were similar to those of youth of that age in the general population,
i.e., offending peaked during late adolescence and declined into adulthood.
Regarding whether out-of-home care experiences and social bonds predicted
self-reported criminal behavior and the risk for arrest, the study found
that foster care experiences predicted both violent and nonviolent self-
reported crime. High numbers of foster-care placements contributed to
increases in both violent and nonviolent crime. This was the case
particularly for African-American youth involved in nonviolent crime. Also,
the link between group care and violent crime was particularly strong for
African-American youth. Youth who accessed independent living services had
lower violent behavior, with reported violent crime decreasing by 2 percent
for every independent living service received. There was only limited
evidence that social bonds predicted violent or nonviolent behavior. Only
about 20 percent of the foster youth became chronic offenders, with
somewhat less than half being nonviolent chronic offenders. Foster youth
were much more likely than their peers to be arrested as they made the
transition to adulthood. There is clearly a need to ensure that older
foster youth are provided with positive opportunities and direction as they
begin their independent living, including employment and education. Study
data came from the Midwest Study of the Adult Functioning of Former Foster
Youth (n=767), a longitudinal panel study that is part of a collaborative
effort of the State public child welfare agencies in Illinois, Iowa, and
Wisconsin and several universities. 8 references

3. Cusick, Gretchen Ruth; Courtney, Mark E.; Havlicek, Judy; Hess, Nathan,
"Crime during the Transition to Adulthood: How Youth Fare as They Leave
Out-of-Home Care." NCJ 229666, Washington, DC: United States Department of
Justice, National Institute of Justice, Feb 2010. 2005-IJ-CX-0031; 2005-IJ-
CX-4031
Abstract: http://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=251697
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/229666.pdf
The study found that offending patterns among youth aging out of foster
care were similar to those of youth of the same age in the general
population, i.e., offending peaked during late adolescence and declined
into adulthood. Regarding whether out-of-home care experiences and social
bonds predicted self-reported criminal behavior and the risk for arrest,
the study found that foster care experiences predicted both violent and
nonviolent self-reported crime. High numbers of foster-care placements
contributed to increases in both violent and nonviolent crime. This was the
case particularly for African-American youth involved in nonviolent crime.
Also, the link between group care and violent crime was particularly strong
for African-American youth. Youth who accessed independent living services
had lower violent behavior, with reported violent crime decreasing by 2
percent for every independent living service received. There was only
limited evidence that social bonds predicted violent or nonviolent
behavior. Only about 20 percent of the foster youth became chronic
offenders, with somewhat less than half being nonviolent chronic offenders.
Foster youth were much more likely than their peers to be arrested as they
made the transition to adulthood. There is clearly a need to ensure that
older foster youth are provided with positive opportunities and direction
as they begin their independent living, including employment and education.
Study data came from the Midwest Study of the Adult Functioning of Former
Foster Youth (n=767), a longitudinal panel study that is part of a
collaborative effort of the State public child welfare agencies in
Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin and several universities. 16 tables, 5
figures, and 93 references

4. Cusick, Gretchen Ruth; Havlicek, Judy R.; Courtney, Mark E., "Risk for
arrest: The role of social bonds in protecting foster youth making the
transition to adulthood." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. Jan 2012,
82, (1), 19 - 31. DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-0025.2011.01136.x
Abstract: http://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=251697
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/229666.pdf
The study found that offending patterns among youth aging out of foster
care were similar to those of youth of the same age in the general
population, i.e., offending peaked during late adolescence and declined
into adulthood. Regarding whether out-of-home care experiences and social
bonds predicted self-reported criminal behavior and the risk for arrest,
the study found that foster care experiences predicted both violent and
nonviolent self-reported crime. High numbers of foster-care placements
contributed to increases in both violent and nonviolent crime. This was the
case particularly for African-American youth involved in nonviolent crime.
Also, the link between group care and violent crime was particularly strong
for African-American youth. Youth who accessed independent living services
had lower violent behavior, with reported violent crime decreasing by 2
percent for every independent living service received. There was only
limited evidence that social bonds predicted violent or nonviolent
behavior. Only about 20 percent of the foster youth became chronic
offenders, with somewhat less than half being nonviolent chronic offenders.
Foster youth were much more likely than their peers to be arrested as they
made the transition to adulthood. There is clearly a need to ensure that
older foster youth are provided with positive opportunities and direction
as they begin their independent living, including employment and education.
Study data came from the Midwest Study of the Adult Functioning of Former
Foster Youth (n=767), a longitudinal panel study that is part of a
collaborative effort of the State public child welfare agencies in
Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin and several universities. 16 tables, 5
figures, and 93 references

5. Mason, Jennifer, "Aging Out: Outcomes of Youth Who Age Out of Foster
Care." Thesis, Texas Tech Univiersity, 2012.
Full text PDF: http://repositories.tdl.org/ttu-ir/bitstream/handle/2346/45169/MASON-THESIS.pdf?sequence=2
